[DOC] Create a suite of pages for Explore Traces (#235)
grafana/explore-traces: docs/sources/concepts/index.md

---
description: Learn about concepts basic to tracing.
canonical: https://grafana.com/docs/grafana/latest/explore/simplified-exploration/traces/concepts/
keywords:
  - Explore Traces
  - Concepts
title: Concepts
menuTitle: Concepts
weight: 200
---

# Concepts

Distributed traces provide a way to monitor applications by tracking requests across services.
Traces record the details of a request to help understand why an issue is or was happening.

Tracing is best used for analyzing the performance of your system, identifying bottlenecks, monitoring latency, and providing a complete picture of how requests are processed.

To use the Explore Traces app, you should understand these concepts:

> - Rate, error, and duration (RED) metrics
> - Traces and spans
> - Trace structure

Author: ```suggestion
- [Rate, error, and duration (RED) metrics](#rate-error-and-duration-metrics)
- [Traces and spans}(#traces-and-spans)
- [Trace structure](#trace-structure)
```

> 

Author: Done.

{{< docs/public-preview product="Explore Traces" >}}

## Rate, error, and duration metrics

The Explore Traces app lets you explore rate, error, and duration (RED) metrics generated from your traces by Tempo.

| Metric | Meaning | Useful for investigating |
|---|---|---|
| Rate | Number of requests per second | Unusual spikes in activity |
| Error | Number of those requests that are failing | Overall issues in your tracing ecosystem |
| Duration | Amount of time those requests take, represented as a histogram | Response times and latency issues |

> 

Author: Done.

---
description: Learn about concepts basic to tracing.
canonical: https://grafana.com/docs/grafana/latest/explore/simplified-exploration/traces/concepts/
keywords:
  - Explore Traces
  - Concepts
title: Concepts
menuTitle: Concepts
weight: 200
---

# Concepts

Distributed traces provide a way to monitor applications by tracking requests across services.
Traces record the details of a request to help understand why an issue is or was happening.

> Tracing is best used for analyzing the performance of your system, identifying bottlenecks, monitoring latency, and providing a complete picture of how requests are processed.

Author: Thank you.

To use the Explore Traces app, you should understand these concepts:

> - [Concepts](#concepts)
>   - [Rate, error, and duration metrics](#rate-error-and-duration-metrics)
>   - [Traces and spans](#traces-and-spans)
>   - [Trace structure](#trace-structure)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [Rate, error, and duration metrics](#rate-error-and-duration-metrics)
- [Traces and spans](#traces-and-spans)
- [Trace structure](#trace-structure)
```

I think you can remove the link to Concepts, since it'll probably just scroll the page up?

The Explore Traces app lets you explore rate, error, and duration (RED) metrics generated from your traces by Tempo.

| Useful for investigating | Metric | Meaning |
|---|---|---|
| Unusual spikes in activity | Rate | Number of requests per second |
| Overall issues in your tracing ecosystem | Error | Number of those requests that are failing |
| Response times and latency issues | Duration | Amount of time those requests take, represented as a histogram |

For more information about the RED method, refer to [The RED Method: how to instrument your services](https://grafana.com/blog/2018/08/02/the-red-method-how-to-instrument-your-services/).

## Traces and spans

A trace represents the whole journey of a request or an action as it moves through all the nodes of a distributed system, especially containerized applications or microservices architectures.
This makes them the ideal observability signal for discovering bottlenecks and interconnection issues.

Traces are composed of one or more spans.
A span is a unit of work within a trace that has a start time relative to the beginning of the trace, a duration, and an operation name for the unit of work.

> It usually has a reference to a parent span, unless it’s the first span, the root span, in a trace.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It usually has a reference to a parent span in a trace, unless it’s the first span, also known as the root span.
```

I thought this sentence was a little hard to read, so just a suggestion. 🤓

It frequently includes key/value attributes that are relevant to the span itself, for example, the HTTP method used in the request, as well as other metadata such as the service name, sub-span events, or links to other spans.

For more information, refer to [Use traces to find solutions](https://grafana.com/docs/tempo/<TEMPO_VERSION>/introduction/solutions-with-traces/) in the Tempo documentation.

## Trace structure

Traces are telemetry data structured as trees.
Traces are made of spans (for example, a span tree); there is a root span that can have zero to multiple branches that are called child spans.

> Each child span can itself be a parent span of one or multiple child spans, and so on so forth.

Author: The diagram below provides an illustration of the text, which helps *a lot* when trying to understand what it says. 
```suggestion
Each child span can also be a parent span of one or multiple additional child spans.
```
